I
see many more New Zealanders, very happy to
see all of you here.
Today I thought we should have Mahasaraswati's
Puja.
Would be a good idea, because we did Mahalakshmi,
let's have Mahasaraswati.
So, Mahasaraswati Principle is on the right
side as you all know.
First is the Brahmadeva's Principle, which
is the Saraswati Principle, and then this
Mahasaraswati takes you to the principle of
Mahabramadeva called as Hiranyagarba.
Now this Hiranyagarba Principle, is very important
for Sahaja Yogis.
First of all, those who think too much or
those who create too much without realization,
those who express themselves in poetry or
in literature or in music, you can say, in
paintings, in all kinds of arts; if they are
not realized souls, then they go to the left
to the extreme or to the right.
So for example if there is an artist, if he
goes to the right gradually his paintings
will become extremely violent expressions.
Would be very much showing something very
violent and also rather, I would say he would
be a man who would be inflexible.
He'll have his own style; he can't move into
another style.
He'll use the same style and he will not get
into any other style.
Kind of a austere nature he develops in his
productions and then when he gets tired of
it, then he will take to something you can
say like abstract art but without realization
the abstract art can be something very absurd
and funny.
I have seen the extremes of it that I've seen
people who put big canvases on the ground
and poured lots of oil paints one after another
and roll over it, is supposed to be a painting.
They say this is spontaneous because they
fell on it or they rolled on that so is spontaneous
painting that's come out.
Now this spontaneous painting should come
from a spontaneous personality not by rolling
on thing or something, I mean, all sorts of
things they do but there's no end to it to
which nonsensical things they think of.
And they think they have achieved a lot and
they've done a lot and also they sell it to
people who have too much of right side.
They like it.
So, they put in lot of effort to create this
kind of a painting.
Also that today's pop music also, which is
very aggressive, is from the same outcome
because you cannot ascend, so you move to
your right.
And this pop music then starts now it's becoming
so horribly noisy, I don't know what to call
it.
Absolutely it can deafen your ears if you
listen to it and the whole thing is, the whole
gestures and all that are so ugly and so aggressive
as if they're going to eat the mike sometimes
I feel the way go on with the mike and things.
And see then these people also impress such
people who are very right-sided and so they
become popular.
But the popularity is not the sign of real
success.
It will come and go away.
All such artists and painters come and go
away they have no, no standing, they are there
for a short time.
And then the history talks about them those
who have been in the center never about the
people who went to the extremes.
God knows how many must have come and gone.
And those who are today also painting or singing
in that way tomorrow they will not be known.
One after another you see the craze comes
in one comes and goes away another so they
are crazy people and they create a craze and
the crazy like them enjoy the craze.
So it amounts to something that is just wasteful
creates no impression in the history.
So this is the right-sided nonsense that comes
out of the right side movement of the sympathetic
going too far with your creativity and also
your writing.
And there were many writers in English language
you know from Shakespeare you can start who
showed the futility of human endeavor like
we call an avaduta, the one who has reached
a very great degree of development in his
spiritual life.
He can see the futility of human endeavor
and then he brings them to the point that
they have to rise above these stupid and human
endeavors and take to some sort of an endeavor,
which will bring them something higher and
also will create something of an eternal value.
Then also we have, I think in English language
I have said, [INAUDIBLE] to Somerset Maugham
and all that.
They're very centrally placed people, also
Cronin was I would say, but then this Hemmingway
came, and he started moving towards the right.
Now I don't know I don't read now modern novels
because all full of filth.
So it moves to the right.
So one is which moves to the right and talks
about all kinds of violence this that, that
also is absolutely not palatable to human
consumption I tell you.
But still they write and people like it.
People want to read about Hitler, they want
to read how people were killed, war stories
this that.
They want to see pictures which has full of
violence, who are killing this and that, so
that their own desire to be violent is satisfied
in seeing those things in films and in, otherwise
also reading such books of that kind.
On the left hand side when they move you see
these artists then same about musicians as
I said that the musicians become sort of a
absolutely suffering from Greek tragedy all
the time.
They go on crying and weeping and saying that
this is sort of, we have been very sad and
this sadness and the tragedy of life, I mean
they go on crying and make you cry also.
So there's no hope for them and they just
go on doing such stupid things.
Then we have you see many artists also of
the same kind specially French.
French writers as well as French poets also
and French painters if you see.
They are very left sided because they drink
a lot.
If you go in any France village after seven
o'clock you can't find even one person on
the road and even if you want to find out
the road and you knock at the door and request
them that you would like know some road and
all that, they're all drunk already at seven
o'clock.
So with this thing they become extremely over-romantic
type and they sing songs of romance, have
no romance in their life you see, they just,
some sort of a imaginary romance they have
and they live in that imaginary world of pain
and sufferings and they have their own ideas
about their own romantic models that they
formed in their heads you see with their left
side.
So the poets and the writers go to the left
side like that and in say for example in our
India we had those Muslims used to drink a
lot then they started a thing called as gazal
and that gazal is nothing but crying.
Even in certain poets you see, we have this
kind of a thing in the other places where
there were many poets who were seeking God
and were crying, "Oh God, when will I meet?"
and in separation they are singing, not in
the meeting, not in the yoga but in separation
they sing, 'When will I meet You, oh God?"
and all that.
And all such people who are still seeking
like such songs going on.
Up to this much is all right but then you
get lots of grotesque type of writers also
who write such horrible things that you feel
you are in hell the way they describe things
are horrible.
And in Sanskrit called as vivastera create
a vivasaras.
And it's the description of very filthy things
which were never before even in English language.
Never I saw that but now some books are full
of filth and dirt and horrible sex descriptions
that you just can't bear it.
So all this comes with the left side movement
that, because you see society also moves from
sometimes to the right sometimes to the left.
So when it moves to the right they like right-sided
things sometimes they move to the left they
like left-sided things.
So also there are people with two types of
temperaments so that's how they start appreciating
these things and unnecessarily they believe
that they are tragic.
As you know about the Greek tragedy which
is a very sort of a fundamental thing I would
say for a Western literature is a Greek tragedy
where a woman marries a man but she doesn't
love her husband so she loves somebody else
and that tragedy is there.
I mean it's artificially created tragedy that
shows that you are married to some man and
you should be happy with him.
Of course I mean if the man is very bad and
troublesome and all that then you can give
him up.
But what's the use of pining for another man,
living with one other man?
Sort of a thing as you must have heard about
Tolstoy who was another great ralized soul.
He's written Anna Karenina and ultimately
he saw that Anna Karenina commits suicide.
Because what she was doing a wrong thing you
see, so he brought the whole thing so beautifully
out and such an introspection all the time
you see going on and also the futility of
this kind of a romance that was there.
So all this shows to us that there are people
at the same time who are in the center I would
say in French writers also Maupassant was
one of them whom I would put in the center.
He showed both the sides and he showed the
right side also.
So we have had Goethe, we had many sort of
people in Europe and England also in English
language because I am talking about English
language.
But also same in Sanskrit, in Hindi, in every
language we have the same type of people but
more in Sanskrit.
We don't have many people with this right
or left side.
The reason is: for literature there are some
rules and regulations.
It's not the Western idea in India that we
should be abandoned people.
That's not accepted.
So even in literature there is a kind of a
restriction.
What is a literature?
Sahitya, it's called as sahit, means which
will be benevolent.
Sahita means which will be benevolent.
If it is not benevolent then it is not sahitya,
it's not literature.
Then it is trash.
So that restriction you see, which is there
which is given to us by great saints and seers,
is still accepted.
Of course, some people deviate a little bit,
little bit they deviate, but once they deviate
it goes out of the society, people just don't
read it.
Say for example some people must have written
this Karma Sutra or something long time back
but we never knew about it, we never read
about it till the Germans came and made such
an ado out of it, we never knew there are
such books.
Even now I don't know who wrote it or I've
never read such a book, I've never seen it
with My own eyes but we have heard about it
that people wrote such things.
But actually if you ask a ordinary human being
in India who is maybe a scholar also, he will
say, "What's that?
I've never heard about it."
But the Germans or the Japanese very particular
on these things, they want to find all such
things.
So these creations of ugliness I should say,
or of vulgarity, all these are a compensation
for people who are very right-sided also because
a right-sided man will always take to drink.
Because you see he wants to compensate so
the right-sided man also will like such horrible
things just to quench his thirst for power
you see.
He's so mad and then he would like to little
bit neutralize that movement in such a way
that his right-sided behavior is little bit
compensated by the left side.
So the people who are right-sided take to
drinks very much.
You will see people will work very hard and
two nights, Saturday and Sunday night, they're
just drunk.
Then Monday they'll come out with a hangover.
See it's very interesting to note how human
being are.
For five days they will slog, slog, slog,
slog, slog and then two days they'll just
go into a kind of a hibernation as they say
and absolutely lost to the whole world.
Whether they are doctors or professionals,
they don't care.
So whatever they earn in five days they'll
spend it in these two days in drinking and
finish it off.
So that's how the total gain in all that creativity
comes in.
Now, when these extreme things start showing
results and then the artist gets just fed
up with this kind of thing going on all round
he sees and all that.
Then within him rises a subtler attitude towards
creativity, towards art, towards books and
all that and then he starts in that, reading
about the true knowledge pure knowledge.
He wants to see paintings or he wants to listen
to music which sings of Divine or divinity.
Whole that madness makes him really think
that now we should start doing something better
and then the Mahasaraswati Principle starts
working out.
But in that also when they start thinking
of God, they fall into traps.
Like you see somebody might fall into some
sort of a religion.
Now as you know these religions so-called
are just money-oriented or power-oriented.
They are not at all in no way spirit-oriented.
That's the reason when they are not spirit-oriented
what they give people is a kind of a personality
which is all mental.
You ask them about Upanishads they will recite
verses after verses.
Gita they'll give big lectures on that hours
together.
For this Chinmoy you see if you hear him,
he speaks for hours together on Gita you get
tired and bored stiff with his lectures.
He can speak about it but nothing inside.
Nothing inside and whatever they speak has
no effect on others also because they are
not awakened people, they are not connected
with the Divine and whatever they do is just
mental.
So when the Mahasaraswati Principle is awakened
you start seeing it clearly that "This is
mental, this is not the truth, there must
be something higher."
They read about all the spiritual works in
their own religion in which they are born,
then they start moving out and reading about
some other religions also.
Then this thing that every religion says the
same thing then it comes to the Agnya point.
When it comes to the Agnya point only there
then suddenly they realize that there is something
wrong, that people are mentally only accepting
this religion and there must be something
beyond this.
At that point if somebody gets the realization,
he just takes to it.
But this Mahasaraswati Principle has to be
awakened in all the people who are musicians,who
are artists, who are this and that and that.
And those who have reached that state, then
suddenly they can get realization very easily.
I've seen some people, very great artists
they are today but when they came to Me first
were not at all well known or anything.
But when they came to Me while singing only
they got their realization just singing.
Or there was one gentleman who was just playing
tabla before Me, I mean not so good, all right,
and then I was in Pune where I saw him, and
in Pune he was playing very well and I said,
"He's the same fellow."
But somebody said, "No, no, Mother, he's not
the same, he was not such a great player."
I said, "All right."
I had taken some flowers for these musicians
so I sent it.
He came running and touched My feet.
"Mother, have you not recognized me or what?"
I said, "I have, that's why I have brought
you the flowers."
I didn't know what to say.
But the way he had improved, now he is a world
famous tabla player, world famous.
It has happened with many others also the
sarod people with the sitar people, so many
people have achieved a lot.
Musicians they after coming to Me they have
asked Me that "Please, do something that we
should be able to enhance our creativity."
I just said, "Take to Sahaj, that's all."
And when they were awakened very surprisingly
today most of them are very well known musicians
and very famous in India.
Of course, the Western musicians I don't know
where to lay My hands because I don't know,
till they the way they are screaming these
days I think their throats will be out may
be something then they might come to Me.
But on the whole My own idea is this, that
those who have reached Mahasaraswati level
through reading or through creativity, but
through writings or anything, when they reach
a certain state of Agnya, then either they
get disappointed go to the left and absolutely
think that this is all useless.
Or else if they get realization they become
really very dynamic artists, very dynamic
writers and people who are creating something
of an eternal value.
So many Sahaja Yogis who have never spoken
on the stage, who have never been on the stage
they said, "We had a fright for the stage."
They all, surprisingly now have become great
orators and speak very well and know so much.
So this is the Mahasaraswati Principle.
Now this makes you a person much subtler and
you start becoming aware that the gross understanding
we had about our art or our creativity has
to be subtler, we have to be subtler people.
And then such writers only appeal to people
who are subtler.
Like William Blake was regarded as a mad poet.
I mean in India I never read about him.
I did read on My own but in the colleges university
they never had William Blake or in any book
as such there was no William Blake.
But when you go to these people and talk to
them, there was one called Mascaro fellow,
he has translated Gita into English, is a
very wonderful person.
He is, actually I think he is a Italian.
Now he is no more.
He lived in near Cambridge.
I went to see him, he was very anxious to
meet Me and when I went there you'll be amazed,
he did My aarti, and he said a mantra in Sanskrit
that "Oh God, You have come to my house!
What have I done in my previous lives that
You are in my house?"
Such a beautiful poet, you see, and he said
in Sanskrit language, he was a master of Sanskrit.
So I asked him, "From which book you have
taken this couplet?"
He said, "I've composed it myself."
So beautiful it was, and then he said certain
things from Gita and all that.
And he said, "Mother, I don't know You might
be ..."
He was very old that time.
He was eighty years of age.
He said, "Mother, maybe You might be able
to change these English, but I don't think
I've done anything.
Even when I translated Gita they are just
reading only.
Reading Gita, that's all.
So what's the use of my translation?
Just like Bible.
Now they are reading word by word Gita.
So, finished!
What's the use of doing this work?"
And he was so disappointed with the whole
thing.
So he said, "What will You work out?
How will You work out?"
I said, "All right, I'll try."
He said, "Of course, You are there; You are
an Incarnation."
He just recognized Me.
"I know You'll work it out."
He wrote a very nice letter to Me also and
then he died.
But such a nice man and he suffered a lot.
Nobody tried to understand him.
He said, "I talked to so many scientists and
things and they're absolutely useless and
very superficial.
So I don't think in this country of England
You'll be able to do much, is a very superficial
country."
There were at least twenty English Sahaja
Yogis with Me sitting there listening to it.
He said, "They are extremely superficial,
this language is superficial, they don't know
about anything about Spirit or anything about
Kundalini."
And he was a very well read man very deep
person and he told Me that while he was studying
gradually he felt this Mahasaraswati Principle
the way he didn't say Mahasaraswati but he
felt there must be subtler knowledge subtler
knowledge.
So he took to books like Gita, this, that,
and then suddenly he felt that it's all reading
again.
It's just the same like translation and specially
when he translated Gita he was amazed that
people were just reading it like Bible then.
Then he said that "Mother, I don't know how
but one day I was praying to Mother Mary and
to the Holy Ghost and I got my realization."
So he was a realized soul and he saw Me in
dream, you see.
He said, "In dream You came and gave me realization."
It's surprising.
He saw Me in dream and he got ...
There's another few people who have got it,
but specially him.
I was so surprised so when I arrived in his
house he recognized Me immediately.
He said, " I saw You in my dream.
You came and gave me realization, You awakened
my Kundalini and You gave me realization."
So you can imagine that this gentleman was
so beautifully placed so subtle, he was that
at the Agnya point.
He just got the dream and he got realization.
And he said, "All the knowledge is now revealed
to me so much more."
And then he sat down with Me.
And he said, "Can you stay for some time?"
I said, "I am now going away."
But at least for five hours he was talking
to Me.
He was not tired, he would not leave Me.
Such an old man was sitting at My feet.
I was telling him, "You sit on the chair."
"'No, I'm very good.
I'm very much all right You sitting there."
So this is what happens with this Mahasaraswati
Principle developing within us.
But we should allow that to grow within us.
So in Sahaja Yoga we are not told that we
are not to read any book, not at all.
We have to read, but in that book we have
to see the subtle points and see for yourself.
I don't read any scriptures, because I don't
need to read.
But when I started reading the, you see, these
intellectuals, what they have to say, I was
amazed that they are saying the same thing.
There's nothing new.
What I know, what I say, that's what they
are saying.
There's nothing new about it; there's nothing
special about it.
Just what all the scriptures have said, they
have said the same thing, and these people
are saying the same thing.
But by saying these things, how are they going
to propagate?
Nothing.
It will be just again something that will
happen outside and it will drop out.
It doesn't become part and part of yourself,
so it has to become innate.
That's only possible if your Spirit comes
into your attention.
There's no other way out.
So luckily you all are realized souls and
your Mahasaraswati is very much there, but
I would say you must read.
Read books of value and understand how it
is absolute Sahaja Yoga there, how it is there.
Anything you take up you'll be surprised that
all these books are talking about Sahaja Yoga.
May not be all of it, but part of the Sahaja
Yoga is there.
All of them talk of some part of Sahaja Yoga
but not the whole of it, because they came
at different times.
And now the Sahaja Yoga is the time when you
have to know the complete, integrated knowledge
of this religious thought that was there.
Complete integrated.
And that's how you understand that all religions
are integrated.
So one should, in Sahaja Yoga, after you come,
people don't take to any reading.
Is a wrong thing.
They should read and understand what others
have said, where have they gone wrong.
But not these nonsensical people.
You shouldn't read these nonsensical people
which you know are nonsensical.
But so many, the other day I got this book
of the Christian Science.
It's all Bible nothing special about it.
They are saying you should not do this; you
should not do this, and all that.
It's all written in the Bible.
What new things are you telling?
Nothing.
You don't need a science for that.
It's just there.
But they are making money out of it by explaining
and this and this.
No explanation needed.
Because that has to come within yourself is
the point which is not there.
So now, this Mahaswaraswati Principle is awakened
within us and we have to read and see the
subtle side of this growth of thought, how
it grew up and how it became subtler and subtler,
and how so many people in the world have contributed
to it.
So many artists, so many musicians and so
many, we can say, writers who have really
contributed to the central path of Sushumna
because they became realized souls.
They were realized souls.
Some were born, and some became, and then
they completely wrote about the yoga.
For example Rabindranath Tagore, in the beginning
he writes, "How, when will I meet you my friend?"
and all that.
What you call the separation song, [INAUDIBLE]
yoga.
And then after some time, suddenly he gets
his realization, because he becomes subtler
and subtler and subtler.
Then he writes about his meeting, his meeting
the Spirit and he writes about it.
So these things work out in such a manner
for some people that by their subtleties they
arrive at a point of realization.
Same thing happened with Buddha.
He did the same thing.
He renounced everything, renounced His family
went out, read Upanishads this, that.
Everything He read and ultimately reached
Gaya where He was sleeping under a banyan
tree.
And while sleeping only, He was so tired and
fed up, He got his realization.
And that's what is very important.
But for the Buddhists what He did before going
there is important.
So they also want to also renounce this and
become sanyasis, this, that.
But by becoming that, nothing is going to
happen.
It's going to Gaya and sleeping there also
won't happen.
It has to happen because He was a pure seeker,
true seeker and that's why it happened.
But for Sahaja Yogis, they don't have to do
anything of the kind they just get it, realization.
Because I think most of them in their last
lives have crossed most of their problems,
and have known that it's nothing, it's all
nonsense in all these things.
Or maybe in this life also they must have
realized it's all nonsense.
And then they must have come to Sahaja Yog.
So it's a very great luck for you that you
are here and you've got your realization and
that you are enjoying yourself.
May God bless you!
Another side which I have left over is the
political side - on the right side, you see.
Even in politics, the growth becomes subtler
and subtler.
Like in say, we can say, in Russia when it
was such a power-oriented thing.
It's not money-oriented.
The Communism was so power-oriented it reached
a place that person like Gorbachev was to
be born who would put it in a proper sense,
and he came on a central path.
He didn't want complete democracy as it is
in America, it's a demonocracy, but he wanted
a balanced thing.
So far he has not been able to manage, but
I'm sure one day he will be managed, but he
will be known all over the world for his great,
great thought and great work of reducing the
pressure between the two great, or say between
the two ideologists.
And he's done such a good thing that now there's
no war, going to be no war, as I mean not
a very big world war but could be little bit
here and there.
That also is coming up which is a problem
of fundamentalism, is not due to political
but fundamentalism.
So now the problem today is fundamentalism
and that also comes from the right side, absolutely.
Fundamentalists are all right-sided people
and this right-sidedness takes them to any
extreme of violence could be or, in some cases,
it's really crazy and madness.
But a new disease has started now those who
go too much to the right is called as a yuppies
disease where the whole conscious mind goes
out of order and you become like a reptile.
I've seen people being carried like big fishes
on the shoulders you see and put in a seat
and they just know everything.
By brain is all right but they understand
everything.
They can talk well but they cannot move their
hands, cannot move their feet if they want
to.
Unconsciously they may, but consciously they
cannot, and this disease is the one which
is a warning to everyone.
So we have be careful in Sahaja Yoga also,
we should not go too much to the right is
also very dangerous, too.
Some people become very fanatic and start
teaching Sahaja Yoga in a very fanatical manner
and sort of you see, make a ... I don't know
what to call that.
But sometimes I see some people speaking in
a manner that one should never speak that
way because we are Sahaja Yogis.
The main thing is love, compassion, which
is a living force and must be done everything,
with that force, which is a beautiful, living
force which creates these flowers, which does
all kinds of beautiful constructive things.
It should not be in any way a oppression,
domination or in any kind of command.
You should not do like this, and organization,
nothing of the kind.
It is something so spontaneous, so beautiful,
just works out.
But as these trees have to be embedded in
the Mother Earth, in the same way you should
be embedded in the principle of Sahaja Yoga
which is compassion, love, and divine grace.
If it is not there, then you'll have problems
with leadership and you'll have problems with
... Anybody who's a violent person cannot
stay in Sahaja Yoga.
He has to disappear.
Either he should change himself entirely or
he has to disappear.
It doesn't work out with people who are violent.
So one has to understand that you may be in
any position, you may be anywhere, you may
be a very poor person, you may be very rich
but makes no difference for a Sahaja Yogi.
The best thing to judge yourself is that whenever
we are doing anything for anyone or saying
anything, is it benevolent or is it violent?
Is it for our self-propagation or self, holier-than-thou
sort of a principle or it is for the goodness
of others?
Once you start judging like that, you'll be
amazed that your whole system will change,
your way of talking, your way of working it
out.
For example today you see there was a lady
who wouldn't allow Me to talk at all.
She was talking all the time about something
which was not important.
But still I was working it out because I knew
that there's no need to talk now.
With this gentleman I can work it out.
So it is always so that you should try to
see the whole thing as a complete play and
take a very, a witness state, in
a witness state you should watch.
If you watch everything in a witness state
then you can handle the whole situation very
nicely, even if you do not talk, if you do
not say anything still in a witness state
you become very powerful, and in that witness
state you can easily solve lots
of problems.
May God bless you!